@def title = "Lecture 1.2: A Minimum Introduction to Linux, Vim and Git"
# Lecture 1.2: A Minimum Introduction to Linux, Vim and Git
We choose the Linux operating system as the programming platform,
the Github website as the place to put your code,
the Julia language as the programming language for implementing algorithms, VSCode as the Julia language editor and Pluto notebooks as the slides for the course.

## A cheatsheet for Linux operating system
We use `man command_name` to get help information related to a certain command.
Use `CTRL-C` to exit any program. Use `CTRL-D` to exit a shell, an REPL and other input streams. The following is a cheatsheet for commands that will be used in this course.

```
ls      # list directory contents
cd      # change directory
mkdir   # make directories
rm      # remove files or directories
pwd     # print name of current/working directory

echo    # display a line of text
cat     # concatenate files and print on the standard output

alias   # create an alias for a command

lscpu   # display information about the CPU architecture
lsmem   # list the ranges of available memory with their online status

top     # display Linux processes
ssh     # the OpenSSH remote login client
vim     # Vi IMproved, a programmer's text editor
git     # the stupid content tracker
```

A more detailed [cheat sheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/linux-command-line/) and a [lecture](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/shell-tools/) are available online.

### SSH
Connect to the AWS host for this course.

To learn more about SSH and two factor authentication, please check [this lecture](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/security/).

### Vim editor
You will find a vim editor in any Linux distribution, with or without a graphical user interface. To edit a file, just type `vim file_name`.

```
i       # input
:w      # write
:q      # quit
:q!     # force quit without saving

u       # undo
CTRL-R  # redo
```
All the commands must be executed in the command mode (the default mode when you start a vim editor),
If you are currently in the input mode, you can alway type `ESC` to go back to the command mode.

To learn more about Vim, please check this [lecture](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/editors/).

## A cheatsheet for Git and Github

Git is a tool for version control.
It is an important tool for programmers to keep track of the different versions of a program and collaborate with others.
GitHub is a website and cloud-based service that helps developers store and manage their code, as well as track and control changes to their code.
There are more than 100 git sub-commands, and the following is a short list to practise and keep in mind.

```
# global config
git config  # Get and set repository or global options

# initialize a repo
git init    # Create an empty Git repo or reinitialize an existing one
git clone   # Clone repository into new directory

# info
git status  # Show the working tree status
git log     # Show commit logs
git diff    # Show changes between commits, commit and working tree, etc

# work on a branch
git add     # Add file contents to the index
git rm      # Remove files from the working tree and from the index
git commit  # Record changes to the repository
git reset   # Reset current HEAD to the specified state

# branch manipulation
git checkout # Switch branches or restore working tree files
git branch  # List, create, or delete branches
git merge   # Join two or more development histories together

# remote synchronization
git remote  # Manage set of tracked repositories
git pull  # Fetch from and integrate with another repo or a local branch
git fetch   # Download objects and refs from another repository
git push    # Update remote refs along with associated objects
```

A more detailed introduction could be found in this [lecture](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/version-control/).

### Examples
1. create a new git repo and make your first commit
Go to the folder that you want to create a git repo from and type
```
git init     # will create a `.git` folder under the current directory.
git add -A   # add all files to git
git commit -m 'some description about the change'
```
Here we have used `-A` to add/remove file automatically instead of adding the files one by one.
You might want to edit the `.gitignore` file to avoid adding garbage files to the commit history by accident.
The following is a typical .gitignore file for a Julia package
```
.DS_Store
.vscode
*.swp

*.jl.*.cov
*.jl.cov
*.jl.mem

Manifest.toml

/docs/build/
/docs/Manifest.toml
```
All files matching the above patterns will be ignored by `git add -A`.

2. upload your local repository to Github
Open your Github homepage, click new repository.
(check)
Please do not need to choose adding README or LICESE if you are creating a Julia package, because the `PkgTemplates` will generate one for you.
Then you will see a detailed instruction, just follow the instruction.

3. making a **pull request**
*pull request* means proposing a change to a repository that you may or may not have the edit permission.

To start making a pull request, you should find the Github repo, click the `fork` icon at the top right of the webpage. A copy of the Github repo will be created under your own account so that you can edit it freely.
```
git clone https://github.com/my-github-name/ModernScientificComputing
git checkout -b my-own-branch-name  # create a new branch
# make some edits ...
git push origin   # will upload the edits to your github repository
```
Go to the forked repository under your own account, you will see a button showing up to suggest you making a pull request, just following the guide.
If you did not see the button poping up, which happens if your edit is old than several hours, you can also go to the pull request page to create a pull request from there.

(missing semester link)

## Julia setup guide
### Installation Guide

#### Step 1. Install/Update Julia binary
For Linux/Mac users, please open a terminal and type the following command to install [Julia](https://julialang.org/) with [juliaup](https://github.com/JuliaLang/juliaup)

```
curl -fsSL https://install.julialang.org | sh
```

For Windows users, please open execute the following command in a `cmd`,
```
winget install julia -s msstore
```

To open a Julia REPL, just type `julia` in a terminal or click the Julia Icon in Windows.

##### For users suffering from the slow download speed

An alternative approach is downloading the corresponding Julia binary from the [tuna mirror website](https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/help/julia-releases/).
After installing the binary, please set the Julia binary path properly if you want to start a Julia REPL from a terminal, check this [manual page](https://julialang.org/downloads/platform/) to learn more.

#### Step 2. Configure the package source and `Revise` in the startup file
First create a new file `.julia/config/startup.jl` with the following content

```julia
ENV["JULIA_PKG_SERVER"] = "https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/julia"
try
    using Revise
catch e
    @warn "fail to load Revise."
end
```

The contents in the startup file is executed immediately after you open a new Julia session.

Then you need to install [Revise](https://github.com/timholy/Revise.jl), which is an Julia package that can greatly improve the using experience of Julia. To install `Revise`, open Julia REPL and type
```julia
julia> using Pkg; Pkg.add("Revise")
```
To exit Julia REPL, just press `CTRL`-`D`.

As a final step, please your Julia configuration by openning a Julia REPL and type
```julia
julia> versioninfo()
Julia Version 1.8.2
Commit 36034abf260 (2022-09-29 15:21 UTC)
Platform Info:
  OS: Linux (x86_64-linux-gnu)
  CPU: 8 × Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10510U CPU @ 1.80GHz
  WORD_SIZE: 64
  LIBM: libopenlibm
  LLVM: libLLVM-13.0.1 (ORCJIT, skylake)
  Threads: 1 on 8 virtual cores
Environment:
  LD_LIBRARY_PATH = /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/gtk-3.0/modules:
  JULIA_PKG_SERVER = https://mirrors.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/julia
```
Please make sure your `JULIA_PKG_SERVER` is set properly.

#### Step 3. Download an editor: VSCode

Install VSCode by downloading the correct binary for your platform from [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/download).
Open VSCode and open the `Extensions` tab on the left side-bar of the window, search `Julia` and install the most popular extension.
[read more...](https://github.com/julia-vscode/julia-vscode)

You are ready to go, cheers!

### A quick introduction to the Julia REPL

A Julia REPL has four modes,

1. Julian mode is the default mode that can interpret your Julia code.

2. Shell mode is the mode that you can run shell commands. Press `;` in the Julian mode and type
```julia
shell> date
Sun Nov  6 10:50:21 PM CST 2022
```
To return to the Julian mode, type the <kbd>Backspace</kbd> key.

3. Package mode is the mode that you can manage packages. Press `]` in the Julian mode and type
```julia
(@v1.8) pkg> st
Status `~/.julia/environments/v1.8/Project.toml`
  [295af30f] Revise v3.4.0
```
To return to the Julian mode, type the <kbd>Backspace</kbd> key.

4. Help mode is the mode that you can access the docstrings of functions. Press `?` in the Julian mode and type
```julia
help> sum
... docstring for sum ...
```
To return to the Julian mode, type the <kbd>Backspace</kbd> key.

[read more...](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/REPL/)
(copy paste the existing one)

### Using Pluto notebooks
To open a pluto notebook, you should have `Pluto` package installed in your global environment by typing in the Pkg mode
```julia
pkg> add Pluto
```

Copy-pasting the following command to the end of your `~/.bashrc` file enables you to open a pluto notebook from a Linux shell.
```bash
alias pluto='julia -e "using Pluto
if length(ARGS) > 0
    notebook = ARGS[1]
    Pluto.run(notebook=joinpath(pwd(), notebook))
else
    Pluto.run()
end"'
```

To open a Pluto notebook in your browser, please open a new shell and type `pluto path/to/pluto/file`.
If the path is not provided, the command will open a the Pluto start up page in your browser.
